# Beyond Gender Identity

Some discussion of [this conversation between Riki Wilchins and Rowan Bell](https://www.assignedmedia.org/breaking-news/gender-identity-philosophy-rowan-bell) this week, a lot of it negative.

First of all, the argument that two nonbinary philosophers (one of whom is credited with coining the word "genderqueer" 30 years ago) are calling for a return to binary-only trans rights to appease fascism is some ridiculous nitpicking reminiscent of the Isabel Fall incident. In that case, a trans science fiction author wrote a short story where biological gender identity is weaponized by dystopian military. Peter Watts previously had explored similar ground with his vision of a military inducing and weaponizing neurodivergence. Fall was widely denounced on twitter and other sites as an anti-trans man absent any biographical evidence. Sources close to Fall reported that she needed in-patient psychiatric treatment and gave up transition convinced she'll never be the right kind of trans person.

Critics here reached a convenient conclusion by screenshotting one paragraph out of context. Overall the piece calls for *better* models of gender identity, not a rollback to the 1980s. The hope is that by moving beyond gender identity as the only model for trans rights, we can develop stronger models that are less vulnerable to political appropriation and better able to include trans people who don't fit into the most common gender identity models. This challenge is faced across the board right now. Noting that the radical right has both appropriated and weaponized concepts like diversity, empathy, and civil rights isn't a call to abandon those values, but to find stronger ways of defending them.

Wilchins and Bell both call for multiple narratives to improve on a model that can best be described as "one size fits most." A lot of later-transitioning and non-transitioning people struggle because we never had the obvious "I'm a ---" sense of clarity. And the goal here ultimately is to defend the rights of trans kids to the needs for social and medical transition, both of which are currently targeted by the anti-trans movement.

Doing better requires looking carefully at needs and issues that are currently unmet. This can include developing arguments about medical and expression freedoms. It can include criticism of gender roles as a form of patriarchal oppression. It can include addressing the pervasive violence and harassment of people seen as non-conforming.

Ultimately this has challenged my thinking regarding Bluesky and that format of social media. It's not the only issue. I've had to drop valuable feeds because of a steady stream of people fighting over hypothetical votes in a future election that has no candidates. It's a mode that favors reaction over reflection and outrage over collaboration.
